Why are there different languages? Why are there different manners of saying the same thing? What in fact is `that same thing'? This blogpost is about what is truly universal beneath language, across different languages, and accross different writing styles.

Language is the human superpower. There are some things we humans can only understand by doing, like making art or playing a sport. But many of the important things we know and skills we have can be taught using language. Every day we use language to instruct, cooperate, investigate, promise, entertain. Language has allowed our most important ideas to survive beyond their original thinkers, so that future generations have the benefit of all the lessons of the past. A theory of language is a theory of everything that can be talked about -- that's a lot!

But if language is so unique to humans, so important and powerful, why are there so many different languages? Think of language like a special body part for humans: just as there is variation in teeth or tails even in the same kind of animal, there are also variations in language which do not affect its job. But what is the job of language? Body parts can be used for many different things, but in their most basic use, teeth are for eating, tails are for balance, and language is for communicating ideas. We can all communicate ideas with each other just fine most of the time, so it seems we humans all have a similar, if not identical, capacity to form and hold ideas. So that is a mystery: if we humans have similarly shaped ideas, and the basic job of language is to communicate ideas, why are there so many different languages?

Here is the first clue for the mystery. We can only speak or point or sign one thing at a time, because, like music, that is the shape of time. So, like music notation, all written natural languages live on a line that goes forward in time. But the things we might want to speak about and point to in the world or in our minds may live in richer spaces than a line. A painting for example lives on a 2-dimensional canvas, a film on 2-space-1-time, a hunt on 3-space-1-time, and who knows how many dimensions our thoughts need? Now the mystery becomes more serious: that we can use language to describe all of these things is as surprising as taking a photograph using a piano!